Our theme does not end
in the form of a question.
Rather, it is a statement of fact.
We can rejoice despite danger.
Please follow along as we look
to the example that the apostle Paul set.
He was able to rejoice despite danger,
and he faced many dangers in his ministry.
In one verse,
he mentions eight different types
of dangers he faced,
including “dangers from robbers.”
While in Ephesus,
Paul may even have been exposed
to wild beasts in an arena.
Please turn with me
to 2 Corinthians chapter 1,
and we’ll read verses 8-11.
And notice what it says:
“For we do not want you to be unaware,
“brothers, of the tribulation we experienced
in the province of Asia.”
Now, he wrote this
while he was in Europe—Macedonia.
He continues:
“We were under extreme pressure
“beyond our own strength,
“so that we were very uncertain
even of our lives.
“In fact, we felt that we had received
the sentence of death.
“This was so that we would trust,
“not in ourselves, but in the God
who raises up the dead.
“From such a great risk of death
“he did rescue us and will rescue us,
“and our hope is in him that he
will also continue to rescue us.
“You also can help us
by your supplication for us,
“in order that many
may give thanks in our behalf
for the favor we receive
in answer to the prayers of many.”
Less than a year earlier,
he had written his first letter
to the Corinthians.
This time, he was in Asia,
the city of Ephesus.
In the 15th chapter of that letter,
verse 32 says:
“If like other men,
I have fought with wild beasts at Ephesus,
of what good is it to me?”
His comments would fit an experience
with literal wild beasts in the arena.
But Paul’s hope
in the resurrection strengthened him,
as he said: “This was so that we would trust,
not in ourselves,
but in the God who raises up the dead.”
He was also encouraged
and strengthened by fellow Christians.
He said: “You also can help us
“by your supplication for us,
“in order that many
may give thanks in our behalf
for the favor we receive
in answer to the prayers of many.”
In the congregation,
we also enjoy a warm brotherhood,
which provides assistance
and support in numerous ways.
At one point in his ministry,
Paul and his traveling companions
felt “extreme pressure”
and were “uncertain even of [their] lives.”
Where did Paul find support and relief?
He was encouraged and consoled
by fellow Christians who came to his aid.
When natural disasters
or other calamities strike,
time and again our Christian brothers
are the first on the scene
to render needed assistance
materially and spiritually
to fellow Christians
as well as to others in need.
Today, Christians are not exposed
to wild beasts in arenas.
However, like Paul,
we can rejoice
despite danger that we may face.
Any of us can face “dangers from robbers,”
or the threat of physical assault,
especially in times of civil unrest.
The Bible foretold that in these “last days,”
people would be “fierce,
without love of goodness.”
As you watch the following video,
note which provisions helped one family
to rejoice despite such dangers.
I was born in Caracas and live
in an area of the city called Petare.
In Petare, I have to live
with violence and delinquency.
A few years ago,
we lost a pioneer sister who,
sadly, was hit by a bullet.
Well, something like that
also happened to my son.
There was a confrontation
in the neighborhood,
and a stray bullet hit my son
and killed him instantly.
That left such a void.
It hurt me to go into his room
and see his empty bed.
And then to see his things:
his shoes, his favorite clothes.
To see them in the wardrobe—
Crying was inevitable.
These situations were very difficult
to deal with at the time.
But as soon as the congregation
found out about the situation,
right away they gave me support.
They were there to help care
for all the things you need to do
when you lose a loved one.
After going through all that,
I was very afraid
to continue
going out in field service.
I feared for my life
and for the life of my family.
I prayed to Jehovah,
and Jehovah gave me
practical wisdom to continue.
Sometimes when I’m alone meditating
and thinking about my son,
those memories return and,
of course, I have a setback,
so to speak,
and I begin to cry again.
But keeping clearly in mind
the promise of the resurrection
is what motivates
me to keep going.
An account that I really like
and that I always keep in mind
is the account about Lazarus.
There, Martha uses an expression.
She says, ‘I know
he’ll rise on the last day.’
And that is the same confidence
that I have in Jehovah.
I know that my son will rise.
Jehovah will give him to me.
At the time
that this terrible thing happened,
it’s true that I lost my joy for a time.
But later after the mourning passes,
the resurrection hope gives us joy.
It’s as if
Jehovah speaks to me,
saying, ‘Keep calm.’
It’s as if he gives me a gentle pat,
telling me to ‘keep going
and that’s what will happen to you.
Keep faithful, and continue loyal,
and I will give him back to you.’
Did you notice what helped this family
to rejoice despite danger?
Prayer, their hope in the resurrection,
the supportive brotherhood
and, of course, Jehovah’s spirit.
Which provisions from Jehovah
are helping you to rejoice
despite the dangers you may have to face?
Is it your relationship with Jehovah,
the brotherhood,
our hope, or something else?
In these last days,
with “critical times hard to deal with,”
we are being admonished
to rejoice in the hope
of deliverance from danger.
We long for the end of this wicked system,
just as Habakkuk longed for relief
from wickedness in his day.
Let’s look at Habakkuk chapter 1.
Feel the stress that he felt
as a result of the violence, quarreling,
and oppression that surrounded him.
He asks: “How long, O Jehovah . . . ?
“How long must I ask
for help from violence . . . ?
“Why do you make me witness wrongdoing?
“And why do you tolerate oppression?
“Why are destruction and violence before me?
And why do quarreling and conflict abound?”
Why? Why?
How long?
But note what he recorded
in chapter 2, verse 3:
“For the vision is yet
for its appointed time,
“and it is rushing toward its end,
and it will not lie.
“Even if it should delay,
“keep in expectation of it!
“For it will without fail come true.
It will not be late!”
Like Habakkuk, we trust in Jehovah
and have the assurance
that He will soon end violence.
Habakkuk took the initiative
to draw close to Jehovah,
his trusted Friend and Father.
He did not just fret over his situation,
relying on his own understanding.
Instead, he prayed
about his feelings and worries.
That’s a good example for us.
Notice his resolve in chapter 3 and verse 18.
There he says:
“As for me, I will exult in Jehovah;
I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.”
Today, Jehovah, the “Hearer of prayer,”
invites us to show our trust
by prayerfully sharing our concerns with him.
Jehovah didn’t reprove Habakkuk
for expressing his anxieties.
He had them recorded,
likely to show that it’s only natural
for us to have such feelings at times.
But Jehovah wants us to call out to him.
Doing so will help us
to experience Jehovah’s response
—his warm embrace
by means of his kind guidance.
He will help us
to know his thoughts
no matter what afflicts us.
Our heartfelt prayers
are one of the deepest expressions
of our trust in God.
We rejoice in knowing that Jehovah
is eager to deliver us
from all forms of danger!
Brother David Schafer,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present
the final talk of this symposium,
“We Can Rejoice Despite . . . Sword.”